+++
title = "Manifest"
description = "Personal Ethos: Explained"
tags=["manifest","cosmogeny", 2025]
+++

## Funny Thing, Existence

Perhaps it is a peculiar facet of my machinations, to spend so much time
thinking existentially, to wonder so much about what it means to exist in
__reality__, or why we have the __privilege__ of occupying a mortal body, if you
could even call it that.

Without musing much about the precise features of the human condition that
keep us far out of reach of omniscience---at least on an individual
level--perhaps I should take solace in what seems to be a beneficial aspect
of reality, as it pertains to us and our standing on the pale blue dot of a
marble that is our cosmic home---the only one that we have ever known to exist.
From where else could all mortal fascinations derive, except for the
small shred of whitespace at the margin on the record of universal time, where
all of human history has been annotated, crossed-out, or scrawled over? All
human emotions that have ever been felt, cried over, laughed at, or loved have
been created here, in what appears at universal scales an inconsequential
moment, way out here on a distant spiral arm of the Milky Way galaxy, which is
but one of countless other galaxies that might be both exactly alike or
completely different from our own...

According to current scientific methods and our mortal (though, I would argue
impressive) understanding, the lifespan of the universe is approximately 13.8
billion years. Most humans (including me) struggle to conceptualize the proper
scale of any amount of billions, let alone 13.8 of them. The total stellar
population numbers an estimated ___100 billion to 400 billion___ entities,
though there are many assumptions that must be made to reach such a figure. That
is 100 billion to 400 billion individual marbles of atomic fusion cast at the
furthest reaches of spacetime . Yet, perhaps the craziest aspect of this
manifestation of reality is that even despite these immense, un scales, space
and the universe is characterized almost completely by being vast, cold, and
utterly empty.

These conclusions rock my world every morning when I drag my meatbag from
beneath the blankets and comfort of bed, ready or not to plod through another day.

Upon further consideration, another perniciously moral question has bubbled to
the surface: in an increasingly globalized, tightly integrated and largely
profit-driven society, how do we navigate an inundation of information while
also leading a simple, positive life that enriches not only ourselves but also
those around us?

I must clarify: I am exceedingly grateful that I was born into "modern-times",
where certain _pervasive features_ of human society--e.g. ~~plague~~,
~~famine~~, ~~rampant warmongering~~, ~~project 2025~~--that have affected our
race for the majority of history no longer pose the same existential risks. I am
also grateful for having the privilege to live during the hitherto
culmination of human culture, built upon the techniques and ideas that
were paved with each of our ancestors to give us the depth of art and experience
we should all enjoy. In this way, I am deeply grateful that most of those who
came before me seemed to consider the existence of those lives who were set to
follow as a miracle that should be preserved and nurtured _a priori_--in the
sense that they, for the most part, tried as best they could to prepare our
world as a harmonious and wonderful place to live even though they did not know
who would follow, or upon which pillars those people would create their
livelihoods.

Yet, I find it mesmerizing to realize that at the time of publication of this
essay, humanity is no more than 300 years older than when the technology to
bring refrigeration into the home was created. Even the Neolithic Revolution's
invention of agriculture some 10,000--20,000 years ago is laughably paltry in comparison
to what we've observed as the lifetime of our universe, or even just that of our
own world. That this occurs on a dynamic rock of dust and debris on a distant
arm of a spiral galaxy that lives amongst millions or billions of others is a
realization that I argue ___is___ the divine, and the very fabric of our reality.

## Pillars of Creation

{{ scale_image(name='pillars-of-creation.jpg', scale = 1) }}

Not to disparage the countless other bright minds behind scientfic endeavors
that play an important role in advancing our knowledge of the physical makeup of
reality, but there are few individuals who have had a larger impact for the
widespread general understanding of physics than Albert Einstein. Current
popular- understanding of the fabric of the universe is I think is mainly
attributed to Einstein through _general relativity_. One of the main corrolaries
arising from _relativity_ is that everything everywhere is always
happening at the same time (didn't they just produce a movie about this?).

TODO: link

When I was a child, I remember the light-bulb moment that occurred when someone
first explained to me that looking at the stars was just a way of looking back
in time.

TODO: finish

## My Mission

"Artificial Intelligence" is starting to be thrown around quite a bit; it might
even be known as the buzz-topic of the 21st century. But, it seems to me that
only one thing is particularly clear: AI is here to stay. Beyond that, and it
becomes increasingly difficult to make statements about or derived from AI that
will stand the test of time as being both prescriptive in solving problems, and
in being verifiably correct--and thus admissible--in cases where the stakes are
perhaps higher than what `insert-corporate-chatbot-here` is capable of
providing as a cost-cutting customer-service tool. Anyone who makes claims that
the death of AI has already arrived is a crackpot, with numerous examples of
such individuals' fundamental misunderstanding of "AI" and associated models
indicating as such.

I don't mean to say that AI is unhelpful, as it clearly is beneficial in a
multitude of business contexts (among others). I simply mean to point out that
we appear to be facing a pivotal moment for our species. It would serve us all
well to make sure that each of our steps are planted firmly on solid ground, as
opposed to vaporous hype and empty promises.

## The Internet and You

I am of the opinion that the internet is among humanity's best creations. I may
even go so far as to say it _is_ humanity's best creation--at least top 5 to be
sure. It represents, as one of its many useful facets, a distributed,
collective, unending tome of knowledge that we could ever amass, available
nearly-instantly and at a moment's notice.

In an ideal world, the internet would be available to every person on planet
earth, for free, in every sense of the word (libre, gratis, etc.). Anything
other than a goal of empowering the greatest portion of humanity to solve our
self-inflicted gunshot wounds will fail. If we want a truly representative and
democratically genuine society (which is a noble goal to be sure, and one that
seems worth fighting for), then we, as humanity, have to put our money
where our mouth is and actually allow the democratic ethos and representation to thrive.
The best way of doing that is by putting tools in the hands of common people
that enable this improvement and necessary upkeep on an individual or local
basis.

Unfortunately, your average American citizen is taught next to nothing about
effectively and safely using the internet. Moreover, they are subject to
brainwashing by corporations and the corporate-bought government into thinking
that these parties have safety, consumer-rights, or sound engineering in mind.
They do this while actively moving the goalposts regarding what it means to live
a fulfilling and happy life, so they can continue skimming fat of the common
people left weary and tired from a being nickled and dimed by every possible
beaurocratic institution, just to tack that next zero onto bank balances of
their board members and shareholders. But, only after they have robbed you of
your data, original-content, and livelihoods to improve their models without
attribution or fair compensation. This issue extends beyond US borders on
account of the dominance of American-media interests in the global economy, and
becomes of paramount importance when considering that these very same models
were developed primarily with an eye towards profit seeking and boundless
capitalistic growth (the likes of which are a _legal_ requirement for conducting
business publicly in the US) instead of the intrinsic values of humanity under
which these models were sold.

This unsettling aspect of the American way of life has reared its ugly
head once more, in the face of newfound awareness of the dangers that come with
such proliferation of globalization. Perhaps it should not be surprising that it
took an uprising of AI to bring this problem to the collective forefront.
Perhaps it remains surprising on account of the collectively dim outlook of
humanity, growing stronger with each passing day. Perhaps what is most surprising is
that it doesn't have to be this way.

## You and the Internet

On account of this encroachment onto the rights and freedoms of
internet consumers, and more broadly the global population, there is a growing
anti-AI sentiment that I have observed among the social circles I frequent most.
This should be the least surprising conclusion recounted here; when an agent of
bad (read: greedy) intention appropriates data produced and owned by the common
people for the purposes of personal or commercial gain, they should expect to
find themselves in the crosshairs of those people. And, even more so in the
cases where not only is data stolen, but used to realize an actively harmful
outcome for those people.

Predicated on the belief that society should trust the will of individuals to
decide how to best achieve their goals, in service to moving the collective
state of humanity in a positive direction, we should then trust that in the face
of such an opportunity for the improvement of the global state of humanity, the
people will select options that are "optimal" in the long-run. Practically
speaking, this requires an alignment of incentives with that of the greater
human race, and in particular that regulatory systems do not incentivize greedy
actors to personal gain that stands staunchly in opposition to what makes sense
for people and the future of our race.

It is for this reason that we must prioritize the open and free development of
artificial intelligence, and promote accessible distribution of all associated
models, tools, methods, to every
person without discrimination of any kind. Choosing any other course of action
creates exactly the environment where the incentives of the greedy can overtake
those of the needy, just as we are witnessing today.

The history books, even as written (which is to say, _by the victors_), show
that this is not a new struggle, but rather the _Achille's heel_ of organized
society.

```
```
